---
title: Quantifiers
createTime: 2025/07/29 15:54:19
permalink: /fit2014/oci1rm1z/
---

## Quantifiers

### Negating Quantifiers

A key relationship in logic is how to negate quantified statements:

- $\neg(\forall x, P(x)) \equiv \exists x, \neg P(x)$
    - "It is not true that all students passed" $\equiv$ "There exists at least one student who did not pass."
- $\neg(\exists x, P(x)) \equiv \forall x, \neg P(x)$
    - "There does not exist a perfect number" $\equiv$ "For all numbers, they are not perfect."

### Existential quantifier

Existential Quantifier (∃): Read as "there exists". The statement

∃X,P(X) is true if there is at least one value for X in its domain that makes P(X) true. It is analogous to a logical

### Universal quantifier

Universal Quantifier (∀): Read as "for all" or "for every". The statement

∀X,P(X) is true if P(X) is true for every possible value of X in its domain.

### Doing logic with quantifiers

- **With Conjunction ($\wedge$)**:
    - $\forall X(p(X) \land q(X)) \equiv (\forall X, p(X)) \land (\forall X, q(X))$. "Everything is a square and is blue" is the same as "Everything is a square AND everything is blue".
    - $\exists X(p(X) \land q(X)) \Rightarrow (\exists X, p(X)) \land (\exists X, q(X))$. If there exists a "blue square", then there must exist something that is blue AND there must exist something that is a square. The reverse is **not** true (having a blue circle and a red square doesn't mean a blue square exists).
- **With Disjunction ($\vee$)**:
    - $\exists X(p(X) \lor q(X)) \equiv (\exists X, p(X)) \lor (\exists X, q(X))$. "There exists something that is a square or is blue" is the same as "There exists a square OR there exists something blue".
    - $(\forall X, p(X)) \lor (\forall X, q(X)) \Rightarrow \forall X(p(X) \lor q(X))$. The reverse implication is **not** true.
        - **Example**: Let the domain be integers. Let $p(X)$ be "$X$ is even" and $q(X)$ be "$X$ is odd".
            - $\forall X(p(X) \lor q(X))$ means "For all integers, X is either even or odd". This is **TRUE**.
            - $(\forall X, p(X)) \lor (\forall X, q(X))$ means "All integers are even, OR all integers are odd". This is **FALSE**.